\documentclass[9pt,]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{usenames,dvipsnames}{color} % color is loaded by hyperref
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Cascading effects of critical transitions in social-ecological systems},
            pdfauthor={Juan C. Rocha},
            pdfkeywords={regime shifts, cascading effects, tele-connections, networks},
            colorlinks=true,
            linkcolor=blue,
            citecolor=blue,
            urlcolor=blue,
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}
  \title{Cascading effects of critical transitions in social-ecological systems}
  \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
  \author{Juan C. Rocha}
  \preauthor{\centering\large\emph}
  \postauthor{\par}
  \predate{\centering\large\emph}
  \postdate{\par}
  \date{April 17, 2017}

\usepackage{dcolumn}

\begin{document}
\maketitle
\begin{abstract}
Critical transitions in nature and society are likely to occur more
often and severe as humans increase they pressure on the world
ecosystems. Yet it is largely unknown how these transitions will
interact, whether the occurrence of one will increase the likelihood of
another, and whether these potential teleconnections (social and
ecological) correlate critical transition in distant places. Here we
present a framework for exploring three types of potential cascading
effects of critical transitions\(:\) forks, domino effects and
inconvenient feedbacks. Drivers and feedback mechanisms are reduced to a
network form that allow us to explore drivers co-occurrence (forks).
Sharing drivers is likely to increase correlation in time or space among
critical transitions but not necessarily interdependence. Domino effects
occur when the feedback processes of one regime shifts affect the
drivers of another, creating a one way dependence. Inconvenient
feedbacks were identified by mapping new circular pathways on coupled
networks that have not been previously reported. The method serves as a
platform for hypothesis exploration of plausible new feedbacks between
critical transitions in social-ecological systems; it helps to scope
structural interdependence and hence an avenue for future modelling and
empirical testing of regime shifts coupling.
\end{abstract}

\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}

Critical phenomena has been documented on a wide variety of systems from
climate, finance, language, neurological diseases, ecosystems and
ancient societies\textsuperscript{1,2}. A large set of critical
transitions in social-ecological systems has been
identified\textsuperscript{3}. As human pressures increase on the
planet, these transitions might become more acute and frequent than
previously thought\textsuperscript{4}. Research on critical transitions
in social-ecological systems is often confined to well defined domains
of expertise (e.g.~limnology, urbanism, climate science), adopting
either an empirical, modelling\textsuperscript{5} or early warnings
indicator approach\textsuperscript{6,7}. These approaches require a deep
knowledge of the causal structure of the system or a high quality
spatial-temporal data respectively. These requirements have confined the
body of research to the analysis of individual types of critical
transitions rather than the potential interactions across systems. Yet,
one of the key challenges of sustainability science is analyzing the
diverse set of interactions across human-environmental
systems\textsuperscript{8}. The aim of this paper is developing a
framework for exploring potential interactions amongst critical
transitions in social-ecological systems, so called regime shifts.

Regime shifts are large, abrupt and persistent changes in the function
and structure of systems\textsuperscript{9,10}. They present a challenge
for ecological management and governance because they are very difficult
to predict\textsuperscript{11,12} and reverse\textsuperscript{9}, while
having substantial impacts on the availability or ecosystem services
that societies rely upon\textsuperscript{13}. A regime is the region of
the parameter space where state variables (e.g.~vegetation density,
coral cover) fluctuate, they are also called equilibrium, alternative
stable states, basins or domains of attraction. Systems prone to regime
shifts have more than one alternative stable states; under similar
parameter values they can suddenly shift from one domain to another when
critical thresholds are crossed\textsuperscript{14,15}. Change in slow
variables (e.g.~temperature in coral reefs) often shrinks the basin of
attraction, making the system more susceptible to shifting when exposed
to shock events (e.g.~hurricanes) or the action of external
drivers\textsuperscript{6}.

How different regime shifts might be interconnected is largely unknown
and a key frontier of research\textsuperscript{8,16}. The concept of
cascading effect has been used in two seemingly different contexts: i)
when referring to the effect of an abrupt change on one species
spreading through food webs\textsuperscript{17,18}; and ii) when local
interactions are magnified by feedbacks that are reinforced across
scales (e.g.~erosion or fire)\textsuperscript{19,20}. What these
interpretations have in common is that both refer to networked systems
(e.g.~foodwebs, landscape mosaics) where a signal (e.g.~fire, species
collapse, disease) spreads broadly or is contained locally depending
upon the system's connectivity. The units of these networks are usually
species or sets of spatial units that represent ecosystems. Here we
broaden the cascading effects concept to networks of regime shifts, when
regime shifts can be represented as causal networks of drivers and
underlying feedback mechanisms or processes (see methods).

To explore interconnections amongst regime shifts the units of analysis
should be regime shifts, and teleconnections\textsuperscript{8} or
cross-scale interactions\textsuperscript{20} should be signals strong
enough to couple them. In this context, cascading effects could occur if
i) two regime shifts are affected by the same driving forces inducing
synchronization of the shift (a fork)\textsuperscript{21}, ii) the
occurrence of one regime shift affects the drivers of other regime shift
(a domino effect)\textsuperscript{6,16,22} or iii) when two regime
shifts dynamics generate new inconvenient (not previously identified)
feedback dynamics\textsuperscript{8} by reinforcing or damping each
other drivers\textsuperscript{22}. Here we present a graphical framework
to explore such hypothetical interconnections.

\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}

\textit{Data:} The \href{www.regimeshifts.org}{regime shifts database}
is to our knowledge the largest online repository of regime shifts in
social-ecological systems (Fig. 1). It offers syntheses and a regime
shift analysis for over 30 generic types of regime shifts,
\textgreater{} 300 case studies based on literature review of
\textgreater{} 1000 scientific papers\textsuperscript{3}. The database
decomposes regime shifts in terms of describing their regimes, drivers,
feedback mechanisms, impacts on ecosystem services, and management
options. It provides a set of categorical variables about impacts,
scales, evidence type; as well as a causal loop diagram that summarizes
the feedback structure of each system\textsuperscript{3}. When possible,
entries to the regime shifts database have been peer reviewed by an
expert on the topic to ensure quality and accuracy of its
contents\textsuperscript{3}.

Through synthesis of current scientific literature, the regime shifts
database offers causal loop diagrams as a summary of the driving
processes and underlying feedbacks of regime shifts. They represent a
collection of causal mechanisms that scientist have reported in their
narratives: both empirical (what they choose to sample) or theoretical
(what they choose to model). Causal loop diagrams (CLDs) consist of
variables connected by arrows denoting causal
influence\textsuperscript{23}. Each relationship must have a positive
(+) or negative (-) polarity that represents the effect of the dependent
variable given change on the independent
variable\textsuperscript{23,24}. Although the functional form that
underlies each relationship is not necessarily known, positive
relationships are proportional while negative are inverse proportional
\emph{ceteris paribus}. CLDs assume that the causal relationships
captured by links are monotonic, while non-linearities are captured by
links sets, thus self-loops are not allowed. Feedback loops are the
basic structural units of the diagram and emerge by connecting variables
in closed directed paths (cycles). Feedback means that once a signal
enters the loop, some part of the output is feed back to the input,
resulting on amplification or dampening of its own signal. Feedbacks can
be reinforcing if the overall polarity of its links is positive, or
balancing if negative. Reinforcing feedbacks are usually responsible for
behaviours that drives the system out of equilibrium, while balancing
feedbacks are responsible for near equilibrium dynamics such as
oscillations and delays. Note that causal links do not describe the
behaviour of variables, only the structure of the system: they describe
what would happen if there were changes\textsuperscript{23}. CLDs were
curated in the regime shifts database in a way that variables names are
consistent (e.g.~agriculture and cropping is kept as `agriculture'), and
feedback loops comparable (e.g.~albedo in the rainfores, Arctic or
Antarctic regime shifts is the same feedback).

\emph{Networks:} Each causal loop diagram was turned into a network by
creating the adjacency matrix \(M\), where \(M_{i,j}\) is \(1\) if there
is a connection or zero otherwise. Link weights \(w_{i,j}\) represent
link polarity taking \(-1\) if the relationship is expected to be
inverse proportional, or \(1\) when proportional. In each network, node
attributes were coded if a node belongs to a feedback loop -a k-cycle in
the network- or not. The later is then by definition a driver, an
independent variable whose dynamics are not affected by the dynamics of
the system at hand. Note that networks in ecology usually describe inter
species interactions such as predation or mutualism. Our approach is
different from what has been done in ecology. Here a network describe a
set of processes, both biotic and abiotic, that can govern ecosystem
regime shifts dynamics. Our approach is inspired by other network
applications to processes such as cells metabolic networks or the
network of human diseases, where a process is not captured by a link
type (e.g.~predation) but by a collection of link interactions (e.g.~the
Krebs cycle). Thus, individual species are not taken into consideration,
bur rather their functional role at the aggregated ecosystem scale
(e.g.~herbivory).

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/Fig1-1} 

}

\caption{Regime shifts around the world. Large points show generic types of regime shifts (n = 35) while small points are case studies (n=324).}\label{fig:Fig1}
\end{figure}

\emph{Forks:} correspond to regime shifts that share common drivers (Fig
2a). This type of connection is expected to increase the likelihood of
synchronization in space and time of different regime shift phenomena,
both in terms of cases (e.g.~two different coral reefs) or regime shift
types (e.g.~thermokrast lakes and peatland transitions both driven by
climate change). Rocha \emph{et al.}\textsuperscript{21} used a
bipartite network of drivers and regime shifts to study this type of
connections. Here we replicate their analysis with an updated version of
the regime shifts database (N=30). Drivers are variables outside
feedback mechanisms and are linked to regime shifts nodes if there is a
reference in the scientific literature suggesting
causality\textsuperscript{21}. Categorical variables from the regime
shifts database were used as node attributes: biome type for regime
shift nodes and scale of management for driver nodes. The statistical
models (see below) were performed for the case of forks on the one-mode
network of regime shifts sharing drivers.

\emph{Domino effects} occur when the occurrence of a regime shift can
increase or decrease the likelihood of other regime shift occurring. We
explore potential domino effects by using the full causal loop diagrams
as networks. The algorithm for identifying domino effects takes the
adjacency matrix of two given regime shifts \(M_1\) and \(M_2\) and
identifies all nodes \(n \in M_1 \cap M_2\) such that \(n\) belong to a
feedback in \(M_1\) but is a driver in \(M_2\). Thus, set differences
between causal pathways suggest missing drivers, and set intersection
between causal pathways and feedback loop nodes indicate potential
domino effects (Fig 2a). By iterating this simple algorithm we derived
how many different pathways exist between every pair-wise combination of
regime shifts. The resulting non-symmetrical matrix represents a
directed network with regime shifts as nodes and link weights as the
number of pathways used for statistical analysis (below).

\emph{Inconvenient feedbacks:} are cycles or feedback loops that might
connect two different regime shifts; and if strong enough, it could
amplify or dampen the coupled dynamics. This type of connection is often
disregarded because research on regime shifts usually focus on one
system at the time; data collection and hypothesis testing for coupled
systems has largely remained unexplored. An inconvenient feedback occurs
when the dynamics of one regime shift affects a variable that belongs in
turn to another regime shit and vice versa (Fig 2a). It means that two
regime shifts could reinforce or dampen each other. Here we explore
inconvenient feedbacks by pair-wise comparison of causal networks.
First, the feedback loops (or k-cycles) are counted by feedback length
\(k\) for each regime shift \(M_1\) and \(M_2\) separately. Then the
cycle count is applied to the composite network \(M_{1,2}\) of the two
regime shifts. The difference between the k-cycles in the composite
network \(M_{1,2}\) and the k-cycles on the individual networks \(M_1\)
and \(M_2\) are the inconvenient feedbacks that emerge when the two
causal networks are joined. By iterating the same procedure to all
pair-wise combinations of regime shifts a symmetric directed matrix is
obtained that is then used on the statistical analysis.

\emph{Statistical analysis:} We study what type of micro configurations
that better explain the global patterns of the network by applying
exponential random graph models\textsuperscript{25}, and comparing them
with a naïve ordinary least squares regression that does not take into
account network structure. The response variable for forks is the number
of drivers shared, for domino effects is the number of directed pathways
that connect two regime shifts, and for inconvenient feedbacks it is the
number of k-cycles that emerge on the joined network that do not exist
on the separate causal networks. The explanatory variables are modeled
as edge covariates derived from the regime shifts categorical variables
(N=92). We calculated the similarity of each pair-wise combination of
regime shifts in the database regarding categorical attributes such as
(i) land use under which the regime shift occur, (ii) ecosystem type,
impacts on (iii) ecosystem processes, (iv) provisioning services, (v)
regulating services, (vi) cultural services, (vii) human wellbeing; as
well as (viii) the spatial scale at which the regime shift occur, (ix)
the temporal scales, (x) reversibility, and (xi) evidence
type\textsuperscript{3,21}. For all 92 categorical variables encoded,
the database reports presence or absence (0,1) allowing us to calculate
the Jaccard index and use it as a proxy of how similar two regime shifts
are. To facilitate the interpretation of statistical models, the Jaccard
distance was rescaled (\(1 - J_{d}\)) so equivalent regime shifts score
1 and complete dissimilar zero. Note that the resulting distance matrix
for all cases contains values \(x_{i,j}\) regardless if the link exist
on the networks used as response. For this reason we also fitted naïve
OLS models to compare what can be explained by similarity alone, and
what is explained by the cascading effects network types (forks,
dominos, and inconvenient feedbacks). Note also that these networks
contain all valued links of count data, therefore the specification for
the exponential random graph models follow Krivitsky\textsuperscript{26}
and a Poisson reference distribution. All software used is under open
access license\textsuperscript{27} and run under the R statistical
language\textsuperscript{30}.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/Fig2-1} 

}

\caption{Cascading effects. a) Conceptual diagram of the framework proposed. b) Causal loop diagram example for the regime shift on peatlands transitions. Positive links are depicted as blue arrows, negative links as red arrows, drivers are variables outside feedback loops (in yellow), while variables inside feedbacks are grey. Both links and vertices are scaled according to the number of feedback loops that where they are involved}\label{fig:Fig2}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Results}\label{results}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/Fig3-1} 

}

\caption{Bipartite network of sharing drivers shows fork type of cascading effects. Updated version from Rocha et al (2015) with 30 regime shifts.}\label{fig:Fig3}
\end{figure}

A preliminary exploration of \emph{fork} type of connections was
introduced by Rocha et al\textsuperscript{21} when asking the question
of what are the main drivers of regime shifts globally. While their
focus was on drivers importance, here we updated their analysis to 30
regime shifts and focus on what aspects increase the likelihood of two
regime shifts sharing the same drivers (forks). Figure 3 presents the
bipartite network composed by 79 drivers and 30 regime shifts. Regime
shifts in this network are more likely to share drivers when they occur
on similar ecosystem types and impact similar regulating services (p
\textless{}\textless{} 0.001, SM Tables 1,2). The odds of two regime
shifts sharing drivers is \(exp(-1.024) = 0.35\), while the odds of them
sharing the same ecosystem type is \(exp(-0.582) = 0.55\) times higher.
This likelihood is also affected by occurring on similar land use,
impacting similar cultural services and aspects of human wellbeing,
occurring at similar spatial scales (but not temporal ones), as well as
having similar types of evidence and reversibility (p \textless{} 0.05,
SM Table 2). Interestingly, while the likelihood of having a non-zero
link is significant, the number of drivers shared is not. The negative
coefficient on the \texttt{non-zero} term indicates zero inflation, this
is that most of the interaction occur through the link weights as
opposed to the number of links, confirming previous
results\textsuperscript{21} for clustering coefficient and co-occurrence
index on the bipartite network. The naïve OLS approach render slightly
similar results, while reversibility, provisional and regulating
services are not significant, similarity on temporal scales is
correlated to number of drivers shared. Yet, the amount of variance
explained by the OLS model is relatively low (adjusted \(R^2\)
\textasciitilde{} 0.3).

Domino effects were investigated by searching variables that belong to
feedback mechanisms in one regime shift and at the same time can be
drivers of another (Fig 4, see a worked example in SM Fig 2). While most
of pair-wise combinations of regime shifts do not have pathways that can
result on domino effects, the maximum number of pathways found was
\(4\). The regime shifts that contain variables that will in turn be
drivers of other regime shifts typically have large spatial scales and
slow temporal scales: thermohaline circulation collapse, river channel
change, monsoon weakening, and Greenland ice sheet collapse. On the
other hand, regime shifts that receive the influence are often marine
and their time and space dynamics contained more locally: kelps
transitions, marine eutrophication, mangroves transitions, coral
transitions and fisheries collapse. The statistical models confirm this
observation. Both, having a link and having a high number of pathways
are significant. The odds of having higher numbers of domino effects are
increased when regime shifts impact similar regulating services and
similar aspects of human well being (p \textless{} 0.001). The OLS
approach pick up weak signals for ecosystem type and reversibility (p
\textgreater{} 0.01) but without the network structure the power of the
OLS model is low (adjusted \(R^2= 0.018\)).

In order to identify potential inconvenient feedbacks we merged causal
networks and found that most inconvenient feedbacks occur at higher
feedback length (Fig 5). Not all regime shifts are connected by
inconvenient feedbacks, but when inconvenient feedbacks do occur they
tend to be on the right side of the distribution at longer cycle
lengths. Even for small networks, the number of cycles tend to increase
exponentially with respect to the increase of links. Although
computationally intensive, the search for k-cycles is feasible in our
networks given the small size and relative sparse structures. In fact,
the maximum cycle length \(k\) is bounded by the size of the network.
Out of the 435 coupled networks analysed, the maximum feedback length
was 56. The statistical analysis shows that there is a zero inflation on
the resulting matrix (fewer links that one would expect by random), but
when they do occur, the odds of having multiple feedbacks coupling two
regime shifts is 7.33 times higher. The odds of two regime shifts been
connected through inconvenient feedbacks increase if the pair of regime
shifts occur in similar land uses, impact similar ecosystem processes,
impact similar regulating and cultural services, and if they occur on
similar scales in space and time (Fig 5, SM Table 2, p \textless{}
0.001).

In summary, we have identified structural dependencies that can give
rise to cascading effects among different regime shifts. The topological
structure of the drivers and feedback mechanisms underlying the
occurrence of regime shifts allows us to explore three types of
cascading effects. Figure 6 summarizes the results of our exploration by
indicating how many of these types are plausible. While regime shifts in
cities (sprawling versus dense growth) is not reported to be affected by
any cascading effect with the regime shifts in our dataset, other regime
shifts such as kelps transitions are often subject to the three types of
interconnections. Of particular importance, the weakening of the Indian
Monsoon, primary production in the Arctic ocean, seagrass transitions,
soil salinization, bivalves collapse and the weakening of the
thermohaline circulation are regime shifts that are expected to be
involved in many of these couplings, at least at the structural level.
This is, without knowledge of how strong these couplings could be or
whether feedbacks are strong enough to produce signals that will impact
the coupled system.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/Fig6-1} 

}

\caption{Cascading effects. Potential identified connections between regime shifts}\label{fig:Fig6}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Discussion}\label{discussion}

This paper aimed to develop a framework for exploring potential
cascading effects among critical transitions in social-ecological
systems. A graphical approach allows us to treat regime shifts as causal
networks composed by feedback mechanisms and drivers reported in the
regime shifts database. Regime shifts interactions can occur when
sharing drivers (\emph{forks}), or when \emph{domino effects} or
\emph{inconvenient feedbacks} are strong enough to couple their
dynamics. While their dynamic behaviour is outside the scope of this
paper, the topological features that would allow coupling are explored
here and serve as a conceptual devise for hypothesis exploration and
further modeling of this coupled dynamics.

Intuitively, the sharing of drivers is proposed as a potential
mechanisms that can correlate regime shifts in space and time, but not
necessarily make them interdependent; unless they also share feedback
mechanisms. Time correlation is debated given that spatial heterogeneity
can break the synchrony induced by the sharing of drivers, meaning that
contextual settings matter for such correlations to
emerge\textsuperscript{16}. Spatial heterogeneity is also attributed as
mechanism that can smooth out critical transitions and soften their
abruptness\textsuperscript{31,32}. Yet, with or without masking
mechanism, identifying fork type of connections is useful for designing
management strategies that target bundles of drivers instead of well
studied variables independently, increasing the chances that managers
will avoid several regime shifts under the influence of the same sets of
drivers\textsuperscript{21,33}. For example, management options for
drivers such as sedimentation, nutrients leakage, and fishing can reduce
the likelihood of regime shifts in coastal brackish lagoons such as
eutrophication and hypoxia, as well as coral transitions in adjacent
coral reefs.

Examples of cascading effects between regime shifts have been reported
in the literature, but here we have developed a framework to explore
graphically what type of mechanisms can underly different regime shifts
coupling. For example, eutrophication is often reported as a preceding
ecosystem state to hypoxia or dead zones in coastal
areas\textsuperscript{34}. Similarly, hypoxic events have been reported
to affect the resilience of coral reefs to warming and other stressors
in the tropics\textsuperscript{35}. Moisture recycling feedback is an
important process reported as a key mechanism on the shift from forest
to savanna\textsuperscript{36,37} or the Indian
monsoon\textsuperscript{38}; but also has the potential to couple
ecosystems beyond the forest that depend on moisture recycling as an
important water source. Changes in moisture recycling can affect
mountain forest in the Andes\textsuperscript{40,41}, nutrient cycling in
the ocean by affecting sea surface temperature and therefore regime
shifts in marine food webs\textsuperscript{42}, or exacerbation of dry
land related regime shifts\textsuperscript{20}. These examples have in
common that a larger scale feedback affects a more localized dynamic in
another ecosystem. However, the opposite is also possible, when the
accumulation of small-scale process scale up and impact larger scale
dynamics. Peters et al\textsuperscript{19} have already explore under
this line of thinking the dynamics of the dust bowl, desertification, or
amplification of fire dynamics. More recently it has been reported that
increasing frequency of boreal forest fire could be actually strong
enough to increase warming in the Arctic\textsuperscript{43,44}.
Permafrost thawing across the Arctic peatlands can be a dangerous
amplifier of global warming too by release of
methane\textsuperscript{45}. Mangrove forest are expected to store less
carbon as their areas shrink and their ability to build peat soils is
overwhelmed by sea level rise; however it is unclear if the effect will
be comparable as to impact global carbon budgets and further
warming\textsuperscript{46}.

While this handful of examples represent an emergent literature on
regime shifts interactions, the framework here developed allow us to
explore more rigorously the type of potential couplings between regime
shifts. For our sample of 30 regime shifts reported in the regime shifts
database, 435 possible pair-wise combinations exist. Exploring such
search space is not a trivial task. Once the mechanisms responsible for
one coupling is identified, it still remains to be explored the
parameter space under which the coupling is possible. In other words,
while the framework identifies plausible connections, modeling efforts
and observational studies are imperative to distinguish plausible from
probable. While the literature continue to provide examples of potential
couplings, our framework allow us to distinguish whether the coupling is
expected to be correlation because of sharing drivers, a one-way
causation (the \emph{domino effect}), or a two-way interaction (the
\emph{inconvenient feedbacks}), providing a useful set of hypotheses for
future research.

Our analysis is purely topological, it shows what potential domino
effects or feedbacks could exist, but it does not reveals whether the
connection is strong enough to couple the dynamic behaviour of systems
known to be prone to regime shifts. A further area of research could ask
under which conditions are these couplings plausible? While
experimentation is rarely an option for testing this large scale
ecosystem dynamics, observational studies are of prime importance as
well as modeling efforts. Dynamic models of this type of dynamics
require careful assumptions about parameter values as well as functional
form of the system's equations. Alternatively, generalized modeling is a
promising technique that does not require particular assumptions
allowing the researcher to reach more general conclusions based on the
systems Jacobian\textsuperscript{47--49}. Another potential avenue for
future research is looking at how transport mechanisms couple far apart
ecosystems. One example already mentioned is the moisture recycling
feedback and how it can affect the water budget of areas down the
`\emph{preceipitationshed}'\textsuperscript{50}. Another
teleconneciton\textsuperscript{8} could be with allocation of resources
through international trade, investigating how demand of resources in
certain countries can shape the state space of ecosystems from the
providing countries.

\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

Non-linear dynamics are ubiquitous to a large range of social-ecological
systems. However, how a regime shift somewhere in the world could affect
the occurrence of another regime shift remains an open question and a
key frontier of research. Here we have developed a graphical framework
to explore potential cascading effects amongst regime shifts. Based on
topological features of causal networks three type of connections have
been proposed. Potential correlations due to sharing drivers are
denominated \emph{forks}. While the spatio-temporal correlation can be
masked by heterogeneity or noise, the cluster of sharing drivers serves
to design managerial strategies. One-way directional interactions are
denoted as \emph{domino effects} and are common in aquatic regime
shifts. Two-way interconnections are denoted \emph{inconveneint
feedbacks} and often encompasses cross-scale interactions. The two later
types of cascading effects call for a more holistic approach for
modeling and studying regime shifts, acknowledging their potential
interdependences.

\subsection{Supplementary material}\label{supplementary-material}

\subsubsection{OLS models}\label{ols-models}

\textbf{Table SM1.} Ordinary least square models

\begingroup  \small 

\begin{tabular}{@{\extracolsep{5pt}}lccc} 
\\[-1.8ex]\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\\[-1.8ex] & \multicolumn{3}{c}{paths} \\ 
\\[-1.8ex] & (1) & (2) & (3)\\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 landuse & 2.57$^{***}$ (0.56) & 0.13 (0.12) & 14.11$^{***}$ (4.38) \\ 
  ecotype & 2.95$^{***}$ (0.41) & 0.28$^{***}$ (0.09) & $-$0.62 (3.15) \\ 
  ecoprocess & 0.77$^{**}$ (0.38) & $-$0.16$^{*}$ (0.08) & 6.27$^{**}$ (2.96) \\ 
  prov\_service & $-$0.15 (0.61) & $-$0.26$^{*}$ (0.13) & 3.82 (4.80) \\ 
  reg\_service & $-$0.15 (0.47) & $-$0.05 (0.10) & 4.44 (3.59) \\ 
  cult\_service & 1.13$^{***}$ (0.39) & 0.04 (0.09) & $-$5.34$^{*}$ (3.00) \\ 
  hwb & 0.94$^{*}$ (0.51) & 0.10 (0.11) & 5.00 (3.97) \\ 
  space\_scale & 0.55$^{*}$ (0.31) & $-$0.03 (0.07) & $-$5.05$^{**}$ (2.44) \\ 
  time\_scale & 1.14$^{***}$ (0.38) & 0.03 (0.08) & 6.29$^{**}$ (3.05) \\ 
  reversibility & 0.52 (0.33) & $-$0.19$^{***}$ (0.07) & 3.61 (2.56) \\ 
  evidence & 2.17$^{***}$ (0.58) & $-$0.09 (0.13) & 9.24$^{**}$ (4.58) \\ 
  Constant & $-$2.50$^{***}$ (0.52) & 0.49$^{***}$ (0.11) & $-$9.15$^{**}$ (4.05) \\ 
 Observations & 435 & 900 & 406 \\ 
R$^{2}$ & 0.31 & 0.03 & 0.11 \\ 
Adjusted R$^{2}$ & 0.29 & 0.02 & 0.09 \\ 
Residual Std. Error & 2.42 (df = 423) & 0.76 (df = 888) & 18.31 (df = 394) \\ 
F Statistic & 17.27$^{***}$ (df = 11; 423) & 2.53$^{***}$ (df = 11; 888) & 4.48$^{***}$ (df = 11; 394) \\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\textit{Notes:} & \multicolumn{3}{l}{$^{***}$Significant at the 1 percent level.} \\ 
 & \multicolumn{3}{l}{$^{**}$Significant at the 5 percent level.} \\ 
 & \multicolumn{3}{l}{$^{*}$Significant at the 10 percent level.} \\ 
\end{tabular}

\endgroup 

\subsubsection{Exponential random graph
models}\label{exponential-random-graph-models}

\textbf{Table SM2.} Exponential random graph models for shared drivers
(\textit{forks}) \begingroup  \small 

\begin{tabular}{@{\extracolsep{5pt}}lcc} 
\\[-1.8ex]\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 & \multicolumn{2}{c}{\textit{Dependent variable:}} \\ 
\cline{2-3} 
\\[-1.8ex] & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Forks} \\ 
\\[-1.8ex] & (1) & (2)\\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 Non-zero & $-$1.86$^{***}$ (0.15) & $-$1.02$^{***}$ (0.18) \\ 
  Sum & 1.05$^{***}$ (0.04) & 0.14 (0.11) \\ 
  Land use &  & 0.32$^{**}$ (0.14) \\ 
  Ecosystem type &  & $-$0.59$^{***}$ (0.10) \\ 
  Ecosystem processes &  & $-$0.15 (0.10) \\ 
  Provising services &  & 0.46$^{***}$ (0.16) \\ 
  Regulating services &  & 1.02$^{***}$ (0.13) \\ 
  Cultural services &  & $-$0.27$^{**}$ (0.10) \\ 
  Human wellbeing &  & 0.33$^{**}$ (0.14) \\ 
  Spatial scale &  & $-$0.19$^{**}$ (0.08) \\ 
  Temporal scale &  & 0.16 (0.10) \\ 
  Reversibility &  & 0.27$^{***}$ (0.09) \\ 
  Evidence type &  & $-$0.41$^{**}$ (0.17) \\ 
 \hline \\[-1.8ex] 
Akaike Inf. Crit. & $-$578.37 & $-$779.70 \\ 
Bayesian Inf. Crit. & $-$570.22 & $-$726.72 \\ 
\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\textit{Note:}  & \multicolumn{2}{r}{$^{*}$p$<$0.1; $^{**}$p$<$0.05; $^{***}$p$<$0.01} \\ 
\end{tabular}

\endgroup

\textbf{Table SM3.} Exponential random graph models for
\textit{domino effects} \begingroup  \small 

\begin{tabular}{@{\extracolsep{5pt}}lcc} 
\\[-1.8ex]\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 & \multicolumn{2}{c}{\textit{Dependent variable:}} \\ 
\cline{2-3} 
\\[-1.8ex] & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Domino effects} \\ 
\\[-1.8ex] & (1) & (2)\\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 Non-zero & $-$1.63$^{***}$ (0.16) & 3.20$^{***}$ (0.36) \\ 
  Sum & $-$0.05 (0.09) & $-$6.66$^{***}$ (0.44) \\ 
  Land use &  & 0.49 (0.51) \\ 
  Ecosystem type &  & 0.26 (0.30) \\ 
  Ecosystem processes &  & 1.15$^{***}$ (0.35) \\ 
  Provising services &  & 1.65$^{***}$ (0.58) \\ 
  Regulating services &  & 2.56$^{***}$ (0.43) \\ 
  Cultural services &  & $-$0.25 (0.26) \\ 
  Human wellbeing &  & 1.38$^{***}$ (0.40) \\ 
  Spatial scale &  & $-$0.04 (0.24) \\ 
  Temporal scale &  & 0.58$^{**}$ (0.29) \\ 
  Reversibility &  & 0.84$^{***}$ (0.28) \\ 
  Evidence type &  & 0.78$^{*}$ (0.40) \\ 
 \hline \\[-1.8ex] 
Akaike Inf. Crit. & $-$556.68 & $-$1,320.93 \\ 
Bayesian Inf. Crit. & $-$547.15 & $-$1,258.94 \\ 
\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\textit{Note:}  & \multicolumn{2}{r}{$^{*}$p$<$0.1; $^{**}$p$<$0.05; $^{***}$p$<$0.01} \\ 
\end{tabular}

\endgroup

\textbf{Table SM4.} Exponential random graph models for
\textit{inconvenient feedbacks} \begingroup  \small 

\begin{tabular}{@{\extracolsep{5pt}}lcc} 
\\[-1.8ex]\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 & \multicolumn{2}{c}{\textit{Dependent variable:}} \\ 
\cline{2-3} 
\\[-1.8ex] & \multicolumn{2}{c}{Inconvenient feedbacks} \\ 
\\[-1.8ex] & (1) & (2)\\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 Non-zero & $-$16.56$^{***}$ (0.34) & $-$9.56$^{***}$ (0.42) \\ 
  Sum & 2.76$^{***}$ (0.02) & 1.99$^{***}$ (0.06) \\ 
  Land use &  & $-$0.30$^{***}$ (0.08) \\ 
  Ecosystem type &  & 0.07 (0.07) \\ 
  Ecosystem processes &  & $-$0.58$^{***}$ (0.07) \\ 
  Provising services &  & 0.23$^{**}$ (0.10) \\ 
  Regulating services &  & 0.92$^{***}$ (0.08) \\ 
  Cultural services &  & $-$0.39$^{***}$ (0.07) \\ 
  Human wellbeing &  & 0.04 (0.09) \\ 
  Spatial scale &  & 0.42$^{***}$ (0.06) \\ 
  Temporal scale &  & 0.42$^{***}$ (0.07) \\ 
  Reversibility &  & 0.26$^{***}$ (0.06) \\ 
  Evidence type &  & $-$0.28$^{***}$ (0.10) \\ 
 \hline \\[-1.8ex] 
Akaike Inf. Crit. & $-$7,922.18 & $-$8,714.67 \\ 
Bayesian Inf. Crit. & $-$7,914.16 & $-$8,662.59 \\ 
\hline 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\textit{Note:}  & \multicolumn{2}{r}{$^{*}$p$<$0.1; $^{**}$p$<$0.05; $^{***}$p$<$0.01} \\ 
\end{tabular}

\endgroup 

\subsubsection{Causal loop diagram
networks}\label{causal-loop-diagram-networks}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/supp1-1} 

}

\caption{Supplementary figure 1. Causal netoworks for all regime shifts}\label{fig:supp1}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{A worked example of domino
effects}\label{a-worked-example-of-domino-effects}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{170125_draft_files/figure-latex/supp2-1} 

}

\caption{Domino effects}\label{fig:supp2}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\hypertarget{ref-Sole:2011us}{}
1. Solé, R. V. \emph{Phase Transitions}. (Princeton University Press,
2011).

\hypertarget{ref-Scheffer:2009wl}{}
2. Scheffer, M. \emph{Critical Transitions in Nature and Society}.
(Princeton University Press, 2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Biggs:2015iha}{}
3. Biggs, R. O., Peterson, G. D. \& Rocha, J. C. The Regime Shifts
Database: A framework for analyzing regime shifts in social-ecological
systems. \emph{bioRxiv} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Lewontin:1969vh}{}
4. Lewontin, R. C. Meaning of Stability. \emph{Brookhaven Sym Biol}
(1969).

\hypertarget{ref-Carpenter2003rsi}{}
5. Carpenter, S. R. \emph{Regime shifts in lake ecosystems : pattern and
variation}. (2003).

\hypertarget{ref-Scheffer:2012cta}{}
6. Scheffer, M. \emph{et al.} Anticipating Critical Transitions.
\emph{Science} (2012).

\hypertarget{ref-Scheffer:2009p4449}{}
7. Scheffer, M. \emph{et al.} Early-warning signals for critical
transitions. \emph{Nature} (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Liu:2015go}{}
8. Liu, J. \emph{et al.} Systems integration for global sustainability.
\emph{Science} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Scheffer:2003p339}{}
9. Scheffer, M. \& Carpenter, S. Catastrophic regime shifts in
ecosystems: linking theory to observation. \emph{Trends Ecol Evol}
(2003).

\hypertarget{ref-Scheffer:2001uu}{}
10. Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., Foley, J. A., Folke, C. \& Walker, B.
Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. \emph{Nature} (2001).

\hypertarget{ref-Boettiger:2013bm}{}
11. Boettiger, C. \& Hastings, A. Tipping points: From patterns to
predictions. \emph{Nature} (2013).

\hypertarget{ref-Hastings:2010p5336}{}
12. Hastings, A. \& Wysham, D. B. Regime shifts in ecological systems
can occur with no warning. \emph{Ecol Lett} (2010).

\hypertarget{ref-Carpenter:2009jr}{}
13. Carpenter, S. R. \emph{et al.} Science for managing ecosystem
services: Beyond the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. \emph{P Natl Acad
Sci Usa} (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-MAY:1977p3426}{}
14. May, R. Thresholds and breakpoints in ecosystems with a multiplicity
of stable states. \emph{Nature} (1977).

\hypertarget{ref-Holling:1973p6861}{}
15. Holling, C. S. Resilience and stability of ecological systems.
\emph{Annual review of ecology and systematics} (1973).

\hypertarget{ref-Hughes:2013cv}{}
16. Hughes, T. P., Carpenter, S., Rockström, J., Scheffer, M. \& Walker,
B. Multiscale regime shifts and planetary boundaries. \emph{Trends Ecol
Evol} (2013).

\hypertarget{ref-Singer:2014gj}{}
17. Singer, M. S. \emph{et al.} Herbivore diet breadth mediates the
cascading effects of carnivores in food webs. \emph{P Natl Acad Sci Usa}
(2014).

\hypertarget{ref-Pauly:1998iw}{}
18. Pauly, D., Christensen, V., Dalsgaard, J., Froese, R. \& Torres, F.
Fishing Down Marine Food Webs. \emph{Science} (1998).

\hypertarget{ref-Anonymous:2007tc}{}
19. Peters, D. P. C., Sala, O. E., Allen, C. D., Covich, A. \& Brunson,
M. Cascading events in linked ecological and socioeconomic systems.
\emph{FRONTIERS IN ECOLOGY} (2007).

\hypertarget{ref-DebraPCPeters:2004ex}{}
20. Peters, D. \emph{et al.} Cross-scale interactions, nonlinearities,
and forecasting catastrophic events. \emph{P Natl Acad Sci Usa} (2004).

\hypertarget{ref-Rocha:2015du}{}
21. Rocha, J. C., Peterson, G. D. \& Biggs, R. Regime Shifts in the
Anthropocene: Drivers, Risks, and Resilience. \emph{PLoS ONE} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Rocha:2010vv}{}
22. Rocha, J. C. The domino effect: a network analysis of regime shifts
drivers and causal pathways. (Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm
University, 2010).

\hypertarget{ref-Sterman:2000we}{}
23. Sterman, J. \emph{Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling
for a Complex World}. (McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2000).

\hypertarget{ref-Lane:2008p6781}{}
24. Lane, D. The emergence and use of diagramming in system dynamics: a
critical account. \emph{Systems Research and Behavioral Science} (2008).

\hypertarget{ref-Hunter:2007bq}{}
25. Hunter, D. R. Curved exponential family models for social networks.
\emph{Social networks} (2007).

\hypertarget{ref-Krivitsky:2012uo}{}
26. Krivitsky, P. N. Exponential-family random graph models for valued
networks. \emph{Electronic Journal of Statistics} (2012).

\hypertarget{ref-Handcock:2008p5095}{}
27. Handcock, M., Hunter, D., Butts, C., Goodreau, S. \& Morris, M.
statnet: Software tools for the representation, visualization, analysis
and simulation of network data. \emph{J Stat Softw} (2008).

\hypertarget{ref-Hunter:2008vh}{}
28. Hunter, D. R., Handcock, M. S., Butts, C. T., Goodreau, S. M. \&
Morris, M. ergm: A Package to Fit, Simulate and Diagnose
Exponential-Family Models for Networks. \emph{J Stat Softw} (2008).

\hypertarget{ref-Morris:2008ty}{}
29. Morris, M., Handcock, M. S. \& Hunter, D. R. Specification of
Exponential-Family Random Graph Models: Terms and Computational Aspects.
\emph{J Stat Softw} (2008).

\hypertarget{ref-RCoreTeam:2012wf}{}
30. \emph{R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing}.

\hypertarget{ref-Martin:2015kl}{}
31. Martín, P. V., Bonachela, J. A., Levin, S. A. \& Muñoz, M. A.
Eluding catastrophic shifts. \emph{P Natl Acad Sci Usa} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Medeiros:2016vf}{}
32. Medeiros, E. S., Caldas, I. L., Baptista, M. S. \& Feudel, U.
Trapping Phenomenon Attenuates Tipping Points for Limit Cycles. (2016).

\hypertarget{ref-Rocha:2015eea}{}
33. Rocha, J., Yletyinen, J., Biggs, R., Blenckner, T. \& Peterson, G.
Marine regime shifts: drivers and impacts on ecosystems services.
\emph{Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Diaz:2008p199}{}
34. Diaz, R. J. \& Rosenberg, R. Spreading Dead Zones and Consequences
for Marine Ecosystems. \emph{Science} (2008).

\hypertarget{ref-Altieri:2017bl}{}
35. Altieri, A. H. \emph{et al.} Tropical dead zones and mass
mortalities on coral reefs. \emph{P Natl Acad Sci Usa} (2017).

\hypertarget{ref-Zemp:2017dr}{}
36. Zemp, D. C. \emph{et al.} Self-amplified Amazon forest loss due to
vegetation-atmosphere feedbacks. \emph{Nature Communications} (2017).

\hypertarget{ref-Boers:2017ej}{}
37. Boers, N., Marwan, N., Barbosa, H. M. J. \& Kurths, J. A
deforestation-induced tipping point for the South American monsoon
system. \emph{Sci. Rep.} (2017).

\hypertarget{ref-Donges:2015fv}{}
38. Donges, J. F. \emph{et al.} Non-linear regime shifts in Holocene
Asian monsoon variability: potential impacts on cultural change and
migratory patterns. \emph{Climate of the Past} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Malik:2011bv}{}
39. Malik, N., Bookhagen, B., Marwan, N. \& Kurths, J. Analysis of
spatial and temporal extreme monsoonal rainfall over South Asia using
complex networks. \emph{Clim Dynam} (2011).

\hypertarget{ref-Clark:2015bj}{}
40. Clark, D. B., Hurtado, J. \& Saatchi, S. S. Tropical Rain Forest
Structure, Tree Growth and Dynamics along a 2700-m Elevational Transect
in Costa Rica. \emph{PLoS ONE} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-MoruetaHolme:2015fy}{}
41. Morueta-Holme, N. \emph{et al.} Strong upslope shifts in
Chimborazo's vegetation over two centuries since Humboldt. \emph{P Natl
Acad Sci Usa} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Bakun:2010p5340}{}
42. Bakun, A., FIELD, D. B., Redondo-Rodriguez, A. \& WEEKS, S. J.
Greenhouse gas, upwelling-favorable winds, and the future of coastal
ocean upwelling ecosystems. \emph{Glob Change Biol} (2010).

\hypertarget{ref-Young:2016kj}{}
43. Young, A. M., Higuera, P. E., Duffy, P. A. \& Hu, F. S. Climatic
thresholds shape northern high-latitude fire regimes and imply
vulnerability to future climate change. \emph{Ecography} (2016).

\hypertarget{ref-Kelly:2015iq}{}
44. Kelly, R., Genet, H., McGuire, A. D. \& Hu, F. S.
Palaeodata-informed modelling of large carbon losses from recent burning
of boreal forests. \emph{Nature Climate Change} (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Zona:2016hq}{}
45. Zona, D. Biogeochemistry: Long-term effects of permafrost thaw.
\emph{Nature} (2016).

\hypertarget{ref-Alongi:2014kq}{}
46. Alongi, D. M. Carbon Cycling and Storage in Mangrove Forests.
\emph{Ann Rev Mar Sci} (2014).

\hypertarget{ref-Gross:2009jr}{}
47. Gross, T., Rudolf, L., Levin, S. A. \& Dieckmann, U. Generalized
Models Reveal Stabilizing Factors in Food Webs. \emph{Science} (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Gross:2004uu}{}
48. Gross, T. \& Feudel, U. Analytical search for bifurcation surfaces
in parameter space. \emph{Physica D} (2004).

\hypertarget{ref-Lade:2013iwa}{}
49. Lade, S. J., Tavoni, A., Levin, S. A. \& Schlüter, M. Regime shifts
in a social-ecological system. \emph{Theor Ecol} (2013).

\hypertarget{ref-Keys:2012bo}{}
50. Keys, P. W. \emph{et al.} Analyzing precipitationsheds to understand
the vulnerability of rainfall dependent regions. \emph{BIOGEOSCIENCES}
(2012).


\end{document}
